Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome Technology Manager of
Development Tools,
Godfrey DiGiorgi.
and the crowd goes wild.
It's Friday afternoon.
Been a long week.
Been a good week?
Excellent.
Great to hear it.
They said you might be a little tired at
this time in the week and that perhaps
we should start doing a dance up here,
but I think you'd rather see develop
how to debug your Mac OS X applications,
right?
And for that,
let me introduce Dave Payne.
I actually really did want to leave the
music playing the whole time this time.
So I guess if you're still here,
5 o'clock on Friday afternoon to the
last day after we've shown you all the
APIs and the tools and everything else,
you must occasionally have bugs.
So I guess we have to deal with that.
So let's talk about
what we'll learn here.
There's a variety of different
approaches to debugging on Mac OS X,
standard debuggers and a
few other tools as well.
In addition, depending on what type of
project you're working with,
you'll be debugging in
different ways potentially.
We'll look at debugging
with Project Builder.
We'll bring our friends from
MetroWorks up to talk about
debugging with CodeWarrior Pro 8.
And we'll get into some
advanced debugging with GDB.
So most of you are probably
familiar with this,
just the overall debugging
architecture on Mac OS X.
So we've got the two primary IDEs,
Project Builder and Code Warrior.
Both of those work through GDB to talk
to the OS and the target application.
The interface to the
OS changes over time.
So, for example,
the Core OS team is adding support
for per-thread signals in Jaguar.
So we're needing to make changes
to GDB to accommodate that.
So we provide GDB as an interface
for Code Warrior as well.
But before we get into the two IDEs,
I'd like to touch on a few
other ways that you should be
familiar with in addition to
just the debuggers themselves.
So in many situations,
you'll be working along and the
application will crash and you
weren't running under the debugger.
Shucks!
Why did it crash?
Or your users don't want
to run under the debugger,
but it would be great if you could
get some information from them as
to why the application crashed.
So it's really important that you
understand how to turn on crash
logging in the console application.
So hopefully most of you run the
console application on occasion.
It's best to not leave
debug logs in your code.
You can see those in console.
You can see system log messages.
Perhaps we've left debugging
log messages in there that you
might want to tell us about.
But you can also turn on
crash logging in console.
So this is the console preferences.
You go up to preferences
and enable crash reporting.
So when you do that,
then each application
gets a separate crash log.
My app has its own window.
Mail.app if it ever crashed, for example.
Projectbuilder.app, each gets its own.
The latest crash is at
the bottom of the window.
So if you've got a lot
of crash logs in there,
you look at the top one, it's like, wait,
I thought I fixed that crash.
Oh yeah, right, right,
the latest one is at the bottom.
So you want to go down to the bottom.
Also, not necessarily intuitive,
but when you reboot the system,
it actually does retain all
the previous crash logs,
which is usually a good thing.
But occasionally you might want
to clear these windows to just
get the things you care about now.
And to be honest with you,
I put a path up here for
where the crash logs land.
To be honest with you,
I didn't verify that that's
actually quite the correct path.
So best of luck.
Also,
can we start the countdown timer here,
please?
Great, thanks.
So the crash logs do include a
stack backtrace for all of the
threads of your application.
Most apps on Mac OS X are
multi-threaded for you under the covers,
at least,
even if you don't have your own threads.
They show the register state
for the thread that did crash.
And if you've got a binary
that has debug symbols,
I believe in Jaguar it should be
showing the file and line number
in these crash logs as well.
So there's other ways to look at
things like what's stomping memory.
So I want to point out that in Jaguar,
we've added support for
hardware watchpoints in GDB.
So we use--
[Transcript missing]
So, okay, now I'm running along.
My app isn't crashing, but it's hanging.
Why is it hanging?
A tool that you can use to take a look
at this is the sample command line tool.
So you go into a terminal window,
run sample with either the name or
the process ID of the process and
how long you'd like to sample it for,
and that'll show the stack backtraces of
what's going on in the app at that point.
So you don't need to recompile
the binary for any of this.
It works just by
sampling the application.
So you can see some
examples of how to call it.
It puts the output log into slash temp,
and again, this is something that
your users can run.
You can also do this
from a remote system.
You can SSH into your system.
Let's say that you've got
a full-screen game that,
you know, normally it's working.
It's running really fast,
but suddenly now it's hanging.
You can do a sample from a remote
terminal to take a look at that.
You can also do an attach with GDB and
actually dynamically go into the debugger
and take a look at what's going on
with the application at that point.
So that's sort of my overview
of alternatives to the
actual debuggers themselves.
Now I'd like to bring on Rab Hagy
from the Project Builder debugging
team to talk about some of the new
features of Project Builder debugging.
Thank you, Dave.
Hello.
In this section of our
presentation today,
I'll be talking about
debugging with Project Builder,
give you a brief overview,
talk about how to set up your project
to get the most out of your debugging,
and then talk a bit about some of our
work with displaying opaque data types,
and also present some new features
that are post your Jaguar CD.
Project Builder, the IDE,
provides a generalized
framework for debugging.
It has a user interface that
presents threads and stacks and
variable views and so forth.
It helps manage your breakpoints and
has support for cross-project debugging.
And within that framework,
we have three plug-ins
for specific languages.
We have an AppleScript debugger,
a Java debugger, which incidentally is
not the same as JDB.
It's our own debugger built
from the ground up and uses
the Java VM wire protocol.
And for the C languages, the C,
Objective-C, C++, Objective-C++,
we use the GDB debugger.
Now, in the other sessions
earlier in the week,
the compiler session and the delivering
with Project Builder session,
we talked a lot about how
to use Project Builder to
control your compiler options,
how to set up your project.
With regards to debugging,
there are two key areas
I'd like to point out.
The first is if you're building
or working with multiple
projects that are related,
an app project and another project
that builds a shared library,
you want to create a common
folder for them to build into.
This solves issues at both build time,
so that everything's found,
and at run time, so that we can run your
newly built program.
The way to set this, it's a... a setting
on the project itself,
and it's--you use the show info command,
and we'll show you how to do
that in our demo in a moment.
The second point is
about compiler settings,
especially for the C compiler.
Of course,
you need to enable the generation
of symbolic information.
And in the other sessions,
we've talked about what is the
appropriate optimization level to use
for delivering your final project.
But during development,
when you're bringing up your project,
we recommend using optimization
level zero so that your
debugging experience is the best.
We present the most complete information.
Now, here's a tip.
If you're working with build settings,
target settings,
look both at the build style
and the target settings to
understand what--in this case,
what optimization level is in use.
[Transcript missing]
Finally,
you can create custom executables,
which is a way to reference a
program not built by Project Builder,
or at least your particular project.
And this is very useful
for working with plug-ins,
where you have your
project builds the plug-in,
and then you've got a program over
here that's going to run and load
your plug-in when you create a custom
executable to reference that program.
We also use custom executables
within Project Builder to help
run some of the Java programs.
We use that to set up, for example,
to run Applet Viewer
for Java Applet Target.
Now I'd like to bring up Dave Ewing.
Dave's our Java and indexing expert.
And he'll be showing us some
of these... Is that what I do?
Yeah.
He'll be showing us some of
configuration issues that we talked
about with a Java servlet program.
But the points are
applicable for C programs,
too.
That's right.
Well, the first thing I'm gonna show
you is how you set up your build
directory for your project.
As Rab mentioned earlier,
this is often used if you have
more than one thing that you need
to build into the same location
so that they can build correctly
together and run correctly together.
So I'm gonna bring up contextual menu
here just to do the show info command.
In this particular project,
it's a Java servlet.
And for the uninitiated,
a Java servlet is like a CGI.
It's something that runs in a web server,
often called a servlet
container in this world.
I'm gonna run this particular program
inside the Tomcat servlet container.
And in order to do that,
I'm gonna actually build it into
the Tomcat web apps directory here.
And since I don't want to
pollute that build directory,
I'm gonna put all my intermediates
inside the project folder in this
other intermediates directory.
Okay, so, also as Rab said,
When you're building for debugging
versus building for deployment,
you need to make sure your
compiler options are set
correctly for each of those.
And the key thing to take home here is,
so we have generate debugging symbols,
pretend this is a native project here.
We have it turned on here,
and we have the optimization
level set here to 1.
But we also have build styles,
and if I go and edit the
active build style...
You can see we override the
optimization setting there.
It says -0, 0.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, the next thing I want to show you
is how I set up this executable.
So I'm going to edit the
active executable here.
And Tomcat, when it's run,
basically starts up with a shell script,
so I'm going to execute
that shell script.
And it takes an argument.
It's just the word "run." Tomcat can
be run in a number of different modes,
including in a debug mode
where it launches JDB,
the command line debugger
that comes with the JDK,
with the Java development kit.
And this particular application
also needs some environment
variables set so that it knows
where to find things on the disk.
So I have some of those set up as well.
And the last thing down here to
show is that I've got it set up to
use the Java debugger in this case.
So I'm going to do a quickie
little demo showing that the
Java debugger is actually hooked
up in Project Builder too.
So let's go ahead and say debug.
brings up the debugger window here,
and some stuff gets printed out by, um,
[Transcript missing]
All that sort of stuff.
There aren't any local variables
in this particular routine,
which is a little boring.
But if I just hit continue,
we can go over here and it's a hello
world sort of applet or servlet.
All right.
Thank you, Dave.
Let's talk a bit about opaque data types.
If you've worked with Mac OS X at all,
you'll no doubt run into the fact that
most of the low-level system libraries
or interfaces have opaque data types.
That is, types without an exposed
implementation structure.
And you can't really tell how
these types store information or...
And not only can you not tell,
but the debugger itself can't tell
because there's no symbolic information.
Fortunately, most of these types have
a functional interface,
an accessor method that will
pull information out of the type.
Our plan and what we've started on,
you'll see the beginnings of this in your
project builder 2.0 beta
CD or on the Jaguar one,
is to use the functional interfaces
to pull information out of these types
and then to show that in the debugger.
And the first step we've done is
with the Objective-C NSString.
It's probably the most
complicated and helped-- helped
pave the way for future work.
Now, if you know in a--in
a debugging situation,
when--when it's not always the case that
your objects or your pointers are valid,
and as a--as a result
of showing NSStrings,
we also developed some technology
to actually validate the pointer
to the string object so that
we don't invoke these functions
until we know that there's a very,
very good chance that it is
a true Objective-C object.
Now, this is in your,
in the CDs that were handed out.
Now I'd like to talk a bit about
some future work that we want
to show that we are going to try
very hard to get into Jaguar.
And it's,
the first new feature is an expression
window that allows you to enter
an arbitrary C expression and have
that displayed in a variable view.
This is useful for showing
globals or dereferencing pointers.
The expression is evaluated in
the current context specified
in the user interface,
meaning the frame you're looking at,
we use that scope information
to evaluate the expression.
Second new feature is the ability
to take a single variable or a
line in the variable view and put
that out as a separate window.
And then a few other new
features that we'll show.
So, let's go back to the demo.
So this is a simple Objective-C program.
It just allocates a couple NSStrings.
And you can see that the constant string,
A string, we pull out its value.
The... Yay!
The next string, str,
is a-- it's a random value.
And I'm gonna assign it to
even a known not-correct value.
And you see we say invalid up there.
Let you know that that
pointer is not valid.
We'll step along here.
Just one word on the interface.
There's a new column called Summary.
That's--the intent is where we'll
put information to summarize a
type or an object of a given type.
And the first thing we're
putting there is the strings.
So we're about to
allocate this new string.
And...
We got the name of our host.
And then we'll step one
more and release the string.
And that, Objective-C runtime,
marks that as being an invalid object.
So that could be handy.
In the next line,
we have a global called glob.
And we'd like to see its value.
So the easiest way is to bring
up a new window expression,
and you can type-- Ah.
Yes.
Made it a simple name so that I could
type it easily and I still can't type.
So if we step now,
we'll do an assignment to that.
And yay, we updated its value.
Let's take AP, Dave,
and put that in the expression.
AP--and let's show the types over
here in the expression window.
We've added a few new things in the
context menu you want to check out.
So we have the type, and in this frame,
AP is an integer.
And when we step down,
we see that AP changes to a
pointer to this little structure.
So expressions are evaluated in the
context that you've selected over here.
Let's see.
Step some more.
All right,
let's go back up to the context menu,
Dave, in the main view there.
And...
You can--let's just pull that out.
Oh, yeah, we've added formatting,
finally, for variable types.
Yay.
And this is a pointer,
so let's do the view as.
And that takes the address--or
the contents of that,
and we'll change it to
view it as an integer.
and that comes up there
and since we know the first
First, four bytes are an integer.
Now when we step...
and the rest of the team.
So, um... I think that'll... man: Well,
we've got one other little thing here.
Oh, yeah, one more thing.
So you can put an expression
into the expression windows.
Well, the expression can actually
contain a function call.
And this function returns a C string,
which is kind of your own
way to summarize this type.
So as we step...
will see that A changes,
and we've fetched and got a new string.
So that's a--you know,
we might find that useful to call
functions each time you step.
Okay.
All right, we're done with our part,
and now I'd like to bring up
Ken Ryall from MetroWorks.
Thank you.
First step,
figure out how to work the slides.
[Transcript missing]
Okay.
Sorry about that.
All right.
We usually collaborate better than that.
Yeah.
Yeah, we work better together on
code than the projector.
So I'm gonna talk a little
bit about Code Warrior,
the Code Warrior Mac tools for Pro 8,
which we talked a bit about
in our session on Tuesday,
and we're going to be shipping
around the end of this month.
They're in beta right now.
When we were here last year,
we had Code Warrior Pro 7,
and that shipped,
and we've had a lot of experience
using that in the last year.
And so we had a lot of
customers carbonize their apps,
bring their apps to Mac OS X with it,
and we learned a lot by doing that.
We--you know,
debugging worked fairly well,
but once you run, like,
the code from large apps like
Microsoft Office or applications
like Adobe's InDesign,
which loads, like,
200 plug-ins on startup through there,
and a lot of new things
people were doing,
like writing
CFM applications that loaded,
you know, Maco code and bundles,
that sort of thing,
we learned a lot about what our debugger
needed to do better on Mac OS X.
So for Pro 8, we started by looking at
performance improvements.
And as Dave talked about earlier,
the Code Warrior debugger on
Mac OS X is based on top of GDB.
GDB provides all the lower-level debug
services that we use in our debugger.
So we talked to Dave,
and the GDB engineers,
and worked together
with them to figure out,
you know, performance bottlenecks,
to find better ways Code Warrior could
talk to GDB and interact
with it in different ways.
So we collaborated on
a lot of improvements.
So I'm happy to say the debugger
in Pro 8 is quite a bit faster,
both with application startup,
for stepping, that sort of thing.
So having said that, it's not as fast as
we'd like for it to be.
And we've heard that as well.
So we're going to keep working on
additional improvements and keep working
with both the folks at Apple and all
of our customers to make it even faster.
One of the things that does
affect debugging quite a bit is
that Pro 8 has a new Maco linker
that generates smaller symbolics,
and that helps our debugger start up
faster and helps performance as well.
So if you used our Maco tools in Pro 7,
I'd really encourage you
to use them in Pro 8.
I think you'll have a
better debugging experience.
There are some other things we added,
because we were kind of frustrated
with coming to WWDC last year
and showing basically the same
debugger we had running on 9,
only, you know,
basically with all the same features.
So we've added things like smart
variable formatting for helping you view
additional data types and some types
that are more opaque in Carbon on 10.
And then we did something that--
people have asked for for a long time.
CodeWare has a plug-in architecture
that lets you add additional
plug-in windows and things.
And we--you could create all these,
but we didn't really have an interface
to let you hook those up to the
debugger or look at debugger data.
So we've done that now so that you can
do custom data types in the debugger and
write your own plug-ins to view your data
in specific ways for your application.
So the rest of the features are really
focused on productivity and performance.
We looked at things in the user
interface that we needed to smooth out.
So we have an improved memory
window and register browser,
especially for people doing debugging
multiple-- apps that have a lot
of threads and need to look at
memory from cross-platform sources.
And the other thing we wanted
to add were event points.
And these are like breakpoints,
except they do more than just stop.
So I'll show those to you in a demo here.
But we have five-- a log point,
a pause point, a skip point,
a script point, and a sound point.
And they'll all make more sense
if I just show them to you.
So here I've got a debugging
session started with the
Code Warrior Pro 8 tools.
And this is just a simple
Carbon Power Plan app.
So I'll stop at a break point.
And this function has a lot of variables.
And the main thing they have
in common is that you really
can't tell very much about them.
All you really see is hex addresses
for things like STL strings and vectors
and rectangles and that sort of thing.
So one of the things we've added
is a variable viewer formatter
plug-in that lets you write
XML descriptions of how you'd really
like those variables displayed.
And if you turn on smart
variable formatting,
then you'll see the results of that.
These all have any
entries for things like,
you know, pictures and rectangles.
You can see for the string.
I can see the value for the string,
the size of the vector,
the name of the file spec,
that sort of thing.
So that's helpful.
But we also wanted to provide a
way to write custom viewers so that
if I double-click on something,
it doesn't just show me, you know,
the hex data or the value of it.
You can actually provide a custom user
interface to show the actual data behind
that variable and see what it really is.
Thanks.
I was actually there about
a month and a half ago,
so.
So we started looking at viewing
some opaque data types as well.
This is a Carbon window,
which is normally completely opaque.
And what we do is if your
application links against a
little library we provide,
it can go out and run some code in
your process and come back and give
us information about the window.
And then we can do the same
thing with like FS specs and
FS refs to where instead of just
being a bunch of opaque data,
you can actually see the path that
the file reference actually refers to.
So now I'll clear this breakpoint
and keep running and show you
a couple of the event points.
These are designed
mostly to solve problems
You have debugging things
where you are trying to debug
things in the user interface,
and if you stop to make a
context switch in the debugger,
it would ruin the thing
you're trying to debug.
So, for instance, in this case,
I'd like to debug my menu-enabling
code and have it tell me when
I'm actually calling this routine
to enable the cut or clear menu.
But if I actually set a
breakpoint there and stopped,
it would ruin it because I would switch
to the debugger and then... So what it's
going to do is it's going to play...
It's supposed to be playing sound.
Okay, sorry.
It's been a long week.
So now I can annoy you
with sounds like this.
And that verifies that the code
in this is actually being called.
Now, in another case,
I want to resize this window
and see what's actually
going on behind the scenes.
But again,
if I stop the debugger each time,
it's going to ruin it for me.
So I'll set something called a log point.
And this is sort of like an
interactive printf statement that you
can just sort of insert in your code.
So in this case,
I want to know the width of the window.
So this should calculate the width of
the incoming rectangle for the window.
I can tell it to treat
it as an expression.
And then in the debugger's log window,
every time I resize the window,
it'll tell me the new size.
433.
and all that without going
to the speech control panel.
So I created a couple more windows
and now it's throwing this assert
because the old code said I couldn't
have more than three windows.
Well, this is annoying,
but I don't want to stop and take
out the assert and recompile it.
So what I'm going to do is find
the assert and set a skip point.
What a skip point does is it skips
over that line of code and now
Now I can continue working without
running into the assert any longer.
So those are some of the
event points in Pro 8.
There are some other ones too.
There's a pause point,
and all it does is pause execution
long enough for the debugger to
update all the user interface.
So if you just want to monitor something
going on without actually stopping,
you can do that.
And the other is a script point
that will go out and execute an
application or an Apple script
whenever you hit that break point.
So that's my demo of the debugger
features in Code Warrior Pro 8.
And I'd like to really
thank Dave and his team,
the GDB guys,
of helping us provide a good
debugger for you on Mac OS X.
Let's see if I can get
anything else wrong.
Jim?
Jim Ingham is next,
but I left the clicker over here.
Oh, but you can tell me how to work it,
because I have no idea either.
All right.
The key part is to point it
straight into that thing.
Okay, okay.
Good.
So we're not overwhelmed by technology.
Great, so that's really cool stuff.
So, and I'm going to tell you
about boring stuff now,
because what we're going to
tell you is the low-level stuff,
which is sort of at the
level of desperation,
and then you want to go,
and you don't have anything
pretty to do anymore.
You're going to have to get down
at the lowest level of stuff.
So first though,
we said this last year and just
reiterate it because it's still true.
I mean, in terms of the Project Builder
and the whole Apple development
environment that we work with,
although we provide
these really low-level,
grody command-line GDB features, I mean,
overall,
we understand that you don't want to
have to use those kinds of interfaces
when you're worrying actually about
your code and how it's working and how
your application's working and so on.
So we want to bring as much as possible
up into the UI and make it all available
to you in some really nice way.
On the other hand,
there are certain classes
of folks who really,
really like typing and really,
really like that interface,
and we still want to maintain
connection with all of that.
And if you've been a
Unix developer for years,
you've got to love it.
You know,
it comes out of your fingers without
you having to think about it.
And we really do want to keep that
experience for our folks as well.
So, you know,
even if Project Builder reaches
the stage where it has everything
possible you could want,
you still might want to use GDB.
There are some reasons for that.
And then in its current state,
there are reasons.
So, one, even with a beautiful UI,
it's a good low-level debugger,
and sometimes the kinds of queries you
can make with a command interface can be
more precise than you can make with a UI.
So it's good to have it there for that.
In the current state of things,
it's good to have it there because,
you know, there's stuff that we
haven't gotten into.
We haven't gotten into the UI yet.
But GDB's been around for
ages and probably can do it
in some hairy way or other.
So it's there for that.
There are also certain things about
having a command line that has some
control constructs and stuff like that,
which allow you to do sort
of investigations on the fly.
And so it's useful for that.
And then finally,
we have made the debugger extensible.
There's the built-in features that come
with the normal GDB user commands that
you can do to kind of do ham-fisted,
ways of doing things like the
really neat formatted data stuff
that they showed in CodeWarrior.
And then we also have a C-level plug-in,
too, which allows you to get at
all the information that
GDB knows about your program.
So you could do whatever
horrible thing you can think of.
And the documentation for all this
is in the reference on your...
the installation on your system,
Jaguar.
Okay, so before that,
just as a little plug,
we have the net version of GDB,
but then we've added a lot to it.
So for those coming from Unix,
there are things that
you won't recognize,
and maybe you like them or whatever.
So this is the little list of that,
and also toot our own horn or whatever.
So the big one is Objective-C support,
which is not in the net GDB,
but that's all done by Apple.
A lot of this stuff we're working
its way slowly back into the net GDB,
but that's a long negotiating process.
The other things we've added are
some better shared library support.
So there's a future break
command so that you can say,
you know, break if you ever see a symbol
looking like this in any code that
gets loaded at any point in time,
which is useful.
And then there's,
this is like the propeller head command.
There's a shared library,
set shared library.
This is the command that you
would use if you want to say,
like, here's a library which
I don't care about,
please don't pay any attention to it.
And this is mostly used by... both
Code Warrior and by Project Builder,
because they can have some
smarts about what they should
and should not pay attention to,
but if you wanted to, you could use that.
There's a save breakpoints
command that was added.
This is mostly useful if
you're not working in the
Project Builder environment,
because Project Builder actually
already saves all your breakpoints.
But if you're a real
geek and you like GDB,
it's cool to be able to save all your
breakpoints and then restore them.
So that's there.
And then the last thing is that
we did add this plug-in mechanism,
so you can actually write C code,
and there's a GDB command line command
to load that code into the inferior,
and then it can, I mean into GDB rather,
and it can have access to
all of GDB's knowledge,
so you can get any information
about the inferior and do
whatever you want with it.
So it's written in C, C++, Objective-C,
whatever you want.
Again, since it's a compiled code,
you can do investigations into
memory and stuff like that in
very fast and flexible ways.
Of course, you know it's C.
You can do everything in C code,
so you can crash GDB with it,
but that's the risk you take.
Also, we track NetGDB,
and one of the things we're really
trying to do is keep up with NetGDB.
So if somebody out on the
Net decides that some structure
should change in size,
we're going to go, "Okay,
it changes in size," and then
your plug-in's going to break
and you'll have to recompile it.
But it's really important for us
to keep up with the Net efforts,
so we're going to continue doing that.
Sorry.
Also, you're linking code into GDB,
and you're going to have to
do a lot of work to do that.
So you're going to have to
So you're linking code into GDB,
so it has to have the
same license that GDB has,
or you'll be breaking the
license agreement for using GDB,
so that's a GPL.
So that won't matter if you
write plug-ins to use in-house,
because, you know,
the GPL says whoever you give
it to has to give the--I mean,
has to have the source, too.
If it's in-house, you know,
that means that they have to be able to
see the server that has the source on it,
no other implications.
But if you distribute
it to other companies,
you will have to give them the source.
So whatever.
And the most psycho example
of this is the MaxBug plug-in,
which is available on your system,
which is a really scary experience,
but you should do it just
for whatever fun's sake.
If you load the MaxBug
plug-in and then type mb,
you'll see in a terminal window
what looks exactly like MaxBug,
except it's like a source
line version of MaxBug,
so it also has the source.
It's psycho, anyway.
Okay, so just a couple of things about
stuff that we haven't yet managed
to hoist into Project Builder,
but which might be interesting
for you guys to do.
That's the next section.
So those sorts of things,
the three main ones are,
one is remote debugging,
one is how to get to watch points,
because we did that kind of late and we
haven't got it into Project Builder yet,
and one is kernel debugging.
So remote debugging is just running the,
controlling the debugger from a window
which is hosted by another computer
so that if you have a game running or
somewhere where switching foreground
and background in order to run the
debugging session is going to make
the debugging session impossible,
then it's nice to be able to type
stuff at the debugger or whatever
you're going to do on another machine
which has a different way of debugging.
Windows server.
The way that you do that is simple.
You know,
you start up the application that you
want to target on the remote machine.
Then you go over to the machine
you're going to debug from,
and in a terminal window,
you SSH into the remote machine,
start up GDB,
and attach to the application.
One little tiny thing that the
Apple guys have added-- they did this
a while ago-- which is not in NetGDB,
is when you want to attach
to another application,
you don't have to go through the
bother of looking up its PID.
If you actually type
"application name" and hit a tab,
there is a PID completer that'll look up
all the PIDs with that application name.
That's just a little convenience.
And we want to do this
in Project Builder,
of course, 'cause it'll be much more
convenient to see your sources.
So we do have a watchpoint support now.
It's not the one, I mean,
it's sort of hardware watchpoint support,
right?
It's not the hardware register,
which is the memory register,
because they won't let us
have that in user space.
But instead, it's a page protection
watchpoint mechanism.
In terms of speed,
that's still pretty good,
unless you happen to have
a page which you're making,
like, thousands of accesses per second,
and your variable happens
to be on that page.
The performance will be fine.
The command to access it
is the gdb watch command.
You say watch, and then you give any
expression or a raw address.
If it's an expression,
GDB will figure out what
memory or memory-- multiple,
you know, memory access.
Like, if it's a pointer that
points down to something,
it'll watch both the pointer
and the thing it points to.
So if either of those change,
it'll tell you, and so on and so forth.
It's pretty smart about that.
There's one--or a couple big caveats.
The first one is that it doesn't
work well for stack objects.
I think this is probably just bugs,
but we haven't figured it out yet.
But something gets really upset if you
try to protect a page on the stack.
So that doesn't work yet.
And then the other thing is that it's
unusual to actually want to watch,
you know, a stack local variable.
So I haven't found that
to be much of a problem.
And then the other one,
which is a little bit more serious,
is that we use a page protection scheme,
and at this point,
there are no sort of special
debugger page watch modes,
so we just use, you know,
the ordinary write protection.
And the problem with that is
that the behavior of the system,
when a buffer that's powered
by a buffer is passed into a
kernel call to be written on,
is write protected,
is that the kernel just fails the
system call and immediately exits
with E and val or something like that.
And there's--in the future,
we'll fix that,
because we have a bug on the
kernel guys to give us a better
interface to watching these pages.
And they say, "Yeah, yeah, yeah,
"but it's not gonna be done in
time for Jaguar." So the symptom
of the behavior to look out for is,
you know, if you are running and
watching a variable,
and all of a sudden something like
a read thing or a system call starts
failing for no apparent reason,
then it's probably because
it's on the same page as the
variable you're watching.
And there's not really much you can
do about that unless you can manage to
sort of move the variable off that page.
And if it's a memory stomping bug,
you're probably not in a good shape,
'cause, you know, you'll move it,
and then the bug won't
happen and so on and so on.
That's the limitation.
So then the next topic
is kernel debugging.
So this is the way
that you debug keks or,
you know,
if you're a Darwin developer and you
want to--or you're just interested in
poking around at what the kernel's doing,
this is how you would
do kernel debugging.
It's a two-machine solution.
There is a stub, an agent in the kernel,
which if you do command-power-button,
or there's--and on the Darwin site,
there's instructions also for
how to write a little user-level
program that'll drop you down
into the kernel debugging stub.
And so then the target
machine is sitting there,
and the little kernel monitor is waiting.
And then on another machine,
you start up GDB,
and you tell it to attach to the machine
that has the kernel stub waiting for it.
And then they carry on this conversation,
and that's how you control the
machine that you're kernel debugging.
When you're sitting on the machine
that you have GDB running on,
you don't know that you're
talking to the kernel that's
controlling the whole machine.
It just looks like an ordinary program,
as far as you're concerned.
You're just looking at the
variables and looking at the stack.
There's no different experience there.
There are a couple things, of course,
you know.
If you actually happen to really,
really lock up the kernel,
then you're gonna lock
up the debugging agent,
too,
and then it won't talk to you anymore,
and you'll get a KDP timeout,
and things will go bad.
And there's really nothing
much you can do about that.
And then your little piece of
knowledge that you got from that was,
"Wow, I really managed to mess the
kernel up," so... I don't know.
The couple of things,
you used to be able to have to
specify the IP address only by number,
but we fixed the kernel,
the KDP protocol, so that it does ARP,
or the kernel monitor stub, rather,
so it does ARP requests now,
so that you can actually
go through routers and use
names and so on and so forth.
So that's a little bit more convenient.
And then the other thing which we've
added to the KDP is the ability
to detach from a session and then
reattach from another machine.
And that can be useful, you know,
if you were the first person who attached
when the machine was panicked or when
your kex was doing something funny,
and you were just completely confused,
you had no idea what was going on,
and you wanted Fred to look at it,
but you didn't want Fred to come
and take your machine and have
to sit in front of it for hours,
then you could detach and then
Fred can attach from another machine.
And that's a little bit more convenient.
And then continue the debugging session.
So that's sometimes convenient.
And the good resource for the
kernel debugging in kex is this,
on your system,
the HTML page that's there.
So kind of the past couple of years,
and we say advanced features,
this is really the little
tidbit of something kind of cool
and gross you can do in GDB.
That's a better name for this section.
Last year we showed using breakpoint
commands to do kind of a ham-fisted
version of the really great stuff
that the event points that they
were showing in Code Warrior.
And so this year I'll do
something a little different.
So I want to talk about the
expression evaluator first of all,
'cause when using GDB that's the
thing that you use most often to look
at what's going on in your program.
I want to talk about the
fact that there is a teeny,
teeny, teeny, tiny little interpretive
language sitting in GDB.
Don't stress it too hard or it will
fall over and kick its feet in the air,
but it can be useful for some things.
And then once you've gotten something
really clever that you've managed to do,
you can actually make user-defined
commands to encapsulate that
knowledge and not have to type it
in again and get it wrong and so on.
So the first thing is
the expression evaluator.
When you're in GDB,
pretty much any of the commands that
take something that you can operate on,
you know,
print commands or call commands or the
thing that you pass to a break point,
to the break command or the thing
you pass to the watch command,
all that goes through an expression
evaluator to figure out what thing
you wanted to pay attention to.
The expression evaluator
can call functions.
If you call functions,
the functions change state.
It basically just evaluates whatever
string you gave it as though it
were an expression being compiled
in the current source language,
that is the source language of
the currently selected frame.
So, you know,
as you go up and down the frame,
you might change from
C++ to C to Objective-C.
And depending on the scope that
you're currently focused on,
it'll evaluate it there.
One thing that's kind of convenient
is that you can store away the results
of a given expression in a convenience
variable and then refer to it later.
So these are the evaluated results.
So, like, if you're like me,
you can never remember anything
for more than five minutes.
You know, you can say, like,
the second line there at
the bottom set $oldval to,
you know, some horrible expression,
and then I don't have to
remember that it was five.
You know, and ten minutes later,
I can say,
"What was oldval again?" I can say,
"Print $oldval," and it'll remind me.
So,
and I don't have to scroll up and down
in the terminal and stuff like that.
So that's useful.
And the first example is the
example of just calling a function.
The one thing about the call example
that's worth noting is that because
of some of the calling conventions and
because basically calling a function with
structure returns that you didn't expect
to return a structure is gonna corrupt
your program in ways that you'll find
out kind of a long way down the line,
we're a little bit fascistic about
not calling functions on your behalf
unless we know the return types.
So if it's a system function,
we actually don't have enough
information to know the return types,
so you're gonna have to provide them.
One thing that we fixed in the
Jaguar GDB and also in the April tool
CD is that if you're calling a
function which is going to return--
If you write it one of these typical
Objective-C expressions where,
you know, you have some method call
that returns some object,
and then you're gonna call a method
on that which returns an object,
in that case,
we parse it and we look and we say,
"Okay, okay, okay,
it would be really annoying if we
didn't assume that this was an id,
so we're gonna assume it's an ID for
you and you won't have to put that in,"
which you actually used to have to do.
That was quite annoying.
So anyway, that one's better.
But of course, you know,
if you called one that
returned a structure instead,
well, we trusted you and you
just crashed your program.
So, sorry.
Okay, so as I say,
there is this little-- actual sort
of command interpreter that has
more than just print and stuff.
It actually has a couple
of control constructs.
And with these, you can get yourself
into a lot of trouble.
Sometimes you can do good.
So the two that it has actually
are-- there's a while command
and there's an if command.
So I just wanted to show
you a little example that
I use all the time for these.
So this is the syntax.
It's pretty straightforward.
So the example is that, you know,
since I work on a kind of an old program,
I have this program that's
just full of linked lists.
And so, for instance,
there's linked lists that store
every single .o file that there is
record of in the entire executable
that GDB happens to be looking at,
which is hundreds and
hundreds and hundreds.
And so paging through those is
just a royal pain in the neck.
So, you know,
suppose you have something like this.
You have this structure
linked list and some data,
and it always has a pointer to next,
okay?
And, you know, there are 2,000 of these,
and you want to print them out.
Even in a GUI debugger,
this is a real pain because, you know,
even if you have a cinema display,
you end up tabbing so far over when
you turn them out that-- and then
you're scrolling back and-- there's no
better way to print them out than that.
You can use the same technique that
I'm going to show you for OO things.
Basically,
you just need to have a way to get next.
And in GDB, you can call functions.
So if you have some collection
class that's a nice OO collection
class or something like that,
as long as you can
call the next function,
you can use the same little trick.
The only problem with this is that
you can't create C++ objects from
the debugger because the runtime
knows the magic of how to do the
malloc that's appropriate for what
the real class is and all that stuff.
And we haven't been able
to do that in GDB yet.
So if you have some class which is only
iteratable by having an iterator object,
well, you're out of luck.
[Transcript missing]
So then the next thing is what if
you're hunting for a particular thing?
So you can use the if construct
to hunt for a particular thing.
So in this case, I want the one where
sumData is equal to 5.
So I just changed this little example.
So inside the while loop,
I only do my little reporting
if this dollar pointer goes
to sumData is equal to 5.
So, you know, again,
this is really the expressions
that you pass to GDB really are the
native expressions in your language.
You can get at anything that you
could have written in the C program
and evaluate it and see its value,
which is pretty powerful.
Again, rummaging through more complex
collections like NSDictionary's or
arrays or NSArrays or whatever,
as long as you have a way to do next,
you know, you can use this trick
to go through them.
And then finally,
I'm not going to type this thing
every time because I get it wrong.
You do something really,
really stupid like you forget set
$pointer=$pointer goes to next and
then it just goes off in the weeds
spinning around forever and ever and
ever and you look embarrassed and stuff.
So in order to avoid having to do that,
what I'd like to do is take
this and actually put it into
some script that I can reuse.
That's what the user-defined
commands are for.
Define is the GDB command that
defines a user-defined command.
You can even pass arguments into them.
If you notice in this case,
I took the exact example from before,
and the only thing I changed
was that instead of saying,
you know, if $pointer goes to
sum data is equal to 5,
in the if test, I checked against $arg0.
So that's the name for all the variables,
$arg0, $arg1, and so on and so forth.
So I can write a little general command
which goes hunting through a list and
finds a particular element for me.
Huh.
It's useful to have around.
And if you do these kind of
things and keep them-- and find
things that are useful to you,
you can put them either
in your .gdb init file,
so that will get read in
automatically when you start up GDB,
or you can put it in some other file,
and then GDB has a source command
that you can use to bring in those.
So the Darwin guys, for instance,
have a huge set of macros for kernel
debugging which grab around and find,
you know, all the-- I mean,
decode all of the kernel data
structures to show you what all
the stacks are and what all the
threads are and so on and so forth.
And if you want to figure out how you can
really get yourself in trouble with this,
I think that's in the Darwin repository.
You can look it up, and there's just lots
of gross stuff in there.
Okay, so now let me bring Dave up,
and he will close off.
So thanks very much, Jim.
So you've seen a lot throughout
the week about good tools from both
Apple and MetroWorks and other vendors.
On our side, we're doing a lot of work to
try to improve the debugging
support in Project Builder.
Please send us your feedback.
And there's a lot of
documentation on the system.
Jim mentioned the GDB documentation.
I'd also like to highlight the Maco
runtime manual that's new in the
current releases that you've got.
It's a preliminary version that's
going to get fleshed out more.
And standard information
for further info.
And let's just go right on into
bringing Godfrey back up so
we can get to Q&A real fast.
On my way, Dave.
All right.
So mailing list addresses,
feedback addresses.